DAKAR, Senegal —  Heavily armed gunmen shouting “Allahu akbar” stormed a Radisson Blu Hotel early Friday in Bamako, the capital of the West African nation of Mali, seizing scores of hostages and leaving bodies strewed across the building.The gunmen barreled past the hotel’s light security, using fake diplomatic license plates to confuse guards, and then burst into the lobby with their guns blazing.“They started firing everywhere,” said a receptionist at the hotel who spoke on the condition of anonymity for fear of reprisals. “They were shouting, ‘Allahu akbar,’ ” meaning God is great. “They cut someone’s throat, a white man.”“I hid in my office,” he said. “I saw four of them, armed to the teeth.”By late afternoon, the siege appeared to be over, and no more hostages were being held, said Col. Salif Traoré, Mali’s minister of interior security.United Nations officials said that at least 19 people had been killed, as well as two or three attackers, with bodies found lying in the basement and on the hotel floors. They noted that security forces were still sweeping the building in search of bodies and evidence that would shed more light on the assault.An American development worker, Anita Ashok Datar of Takoma Park, Md., was killed, as was at least one Belgian citizen. The nationalities of the other victims were not immediately clear.The gunmen took “about 100 hostages,” said Gen. Didier Dacko of the Malian Army, before soldiers sealed the perimeter and stormed inside, “looking for the terrorists.”From early on, dozens of guests, including women, children and older people, streamed out of the hotel after hiding in their rooms, many of them crying and barely clothed.The attack unfolded with 125 guests and 13 employees inside, according to the operators of the hotel. The visitors had come from far and wide, including Europe, India, China, Turkey and Algeria. They included diplomats, businesspeople, pilots and flight attendants.President Obama condemned the assault from Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, calling it “another awful reminder that the scourge of terrorism threatens many of our nations.”The siege in Mali, a former French colony, occurred only a week after terrorists with assault rifles and suicide vests killed 130 people in attacks across Paris.It was not immediately clear who was responsible for the attack in Mali. Al Jazeera reported that it had received a recording asserting that a local militant group, Al Mourabitoun, had carried out the assault in conjunction with Al Qaeda’s regional affiliate, though the claim could not be independently confirmed.France’s defense minister told French television that Mokhtar Belmokhtar, a longtime Qaeda member who claimed responsibility for the 2013 siege of an Algerian gas plant in which dozens of hostages were killed, was “likely behind” the attack in Mali, but he acknowledged that “we are not completely certain of it.”Mr. Belmokhtar has long been a shadowy figure among extremists. Since June, he has been reported killed at least twice, but American officials concede that he is probably still at large.Mali has long struggled with insurrection and Islamist extremism, including smaller-scale attacks on a restaurant and another hotel this year.“We don’t want to scare our people, but we have already said that Mali will have to get used to situations like this,” President Ibrahim Boubacar Keita of Mali, who was visiting Chad, told France 24. He added, “No one, nowhere, is safe, given the danger of terrorism.”Northern Mali fell under the control of rebels and Islamist militants in 2012. A French-led offensive ousted them in 2013, but remnants of the militant groups have staged a number of attacks on United Nations peacekeepers and Malian forces. Hundreds of French soldiers remain in the country.A peace accord was signed in June between the government and several rebel factions. But the truce has been broken several times, growing lawlessness has driven civilians from the north of the country, and the United Nations peacekeeping mission in Mali is proving to be one of the deadliest in the world. So far 40 peacekeepers have been killed.United Nations officials said they were worried that the attacks could have been intended, at least in part, to undermine the halting steps toward peace. Some of the people at the hotel were diplomats in town for a meeting to monitor those efforts. In a statement Friday, Secretary General Ban Ki-moon’s office said he “deplores any attempt to derail” the peace process.The Radisson Blu Hotel is a popular place for foreigners to stay in Bamako, a city with about two million people.Twelve to 15 Americans were believed to be at the hotel when the gunmen arrived, an American Defense Department official said. About 20 Indian citizens were there but were evacuated safely, the Indian ambassador to Mali said.Germany’s Foreign Ministry said that two Germans were among the hostages who had been released.Six Belgians were registered in the hotel, according to a Foreign Ministry spokesman in that country. At least one of them, a 39-year-old Belgian working for the Wallonia-Brussels regional Parliament, died during the attack. He was in Mali for a conference aimed at training Malian civil servants. Another Belgian remained missing, the ministry said.A diplomat at the Chinese Embassy in Bamako said eight Chinese businesspeople had been trapped in the hotel. Embassy officials at the scene were in touch with some of the Chinese hostages by WeChat, a Chinese messaging service, the diplomat said.Kassim Traoré, a Malian journalist who was in a building about 160 feet from the Radisson, said the attackers had told hostages to recite a declaration of Muslim faith as a way of separating Muslims from non-Muslims. Those who could recite the declaration, the Shahada, were allowed to leave the hotel. The Shabab, a Qaeda affiliate in East Africa, used a similar approach in the attack at the Westgate Mall in Nairobi, Kenya, in 2013.Clément René, 57, a French citizen, came out onto the balcony of his fifth-floor room after he heard repeated gunshots around 7 a.m. One of the attackers, bearing an AK-47, was running into the hotel, shooting back at the hotel security forces.As shooting intensified, Mr. René fled back into his room, turned off the lights, put his phone on silent mode and waited. “The sound kept coming up as if it was moving from floor to floor,” he said. “The sound of guns, explosions and what seemed to be a grenade.”He felt as if he was in the middle of the crossfire. “I then sent hundreds of text messages, to my family, my wife and two daughters,” Mr. René said.He was finally freed from his room by Malian soldiers who stormed the corridor of his floor. In the lobby, he passed a body with a tarp thrown over it.“All I could see were his shoes sticking out,” Mr. René said. “Big black ranger boots, which made me think it might be one of the terrorists.” The glass lobby doors had been shattered.Kamissoko Lassine, the hotel’s chief pastry chef, said two armed men arrived at the hotel around 7 a.m. “They were driving a vehicle with diplomatic plates,” he said. “You know how easy that is at the hotel? The guards just lifted the barrier.”“They opened fire and wounded the guard at the front,” Mr. Lassine said. “They took the hotel hostage and moved people into a big hall.”A member of the United Nations peacekeeping force in Mali said there were many French people in the hotel, including Air France staff members. The airline later said in a statement that 12 of its crew members had been at the hotel and were freed.Five Turkish Airlines crew members, including pilots and flight attendants, were also freed, while two remained inside the hotel, a Turkish government official said.Mali has been crippled by instability since January 2012, when rebels and Qaeda-linked militants — armed with the remnants of the arsenal of the Libyan leader Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi — began advancing through the country’s vast desert in the north and capturing towns.A coup, stirred in part by anger over the government’s handling of the insurrection, ousted Mali’s elected government in March 2012. Amid the chaos, Islamist rebels consolidated their hold on the northern part of the country, imposing a harsh version of Islamic law.In January 2013, the Islamist forces began advancing south from their northern stronghold, heading in the direction of Mali’s capital. France sent in troops to stop them. A brief military campaign halted the Islamist advance, recaptured cities and towns like Timbuktu that had been under the militants’ control, and chased the remaining Islamist fighters into the desert.But then, with no warning, other militants linked to Al Qaeda stormed a vast gas production facility in the desert of neighboring Algeria, taking dozens of expatriate workers hostage. Thirty-eight were killed during the siege of the gas plant.With hundreds of French troops still in Mali and the country highly reliant on donors, elections in 2013 restored a democratic government. But its hold on the north remains weak.There are frequent attacks by Islamist fighters, in particular on United Nations troops, in the northern provinces. In August United Nations workers were killed in an assault on a hotel in central Mali. Five months before, militants killed five at a restaurant in Bamako.In the assault in August, jihadists stormed a hotel in Sévaré, north of the capital, where United Nations staff members were staying, seizing hostages and killing at least five Malian soldiers and a United Nations contractor.


WASHINGTON —  He was spirited out of a federal prison on Friday under cover of night, eluding witnesses in a cloak-and-dagger coda to a spy story that has strained relations between two allies for three decades.But while Jonathan J. Pollard, one of the most notorious spies of the late Cold War, tried to stay out of sight after emerging from custody almost as if from a time machine, the United States and Israel hoped his release would finally heal a long-festering open wound in their partnership.For 30 years, Mr. Pollard was at the center of a profound struggle between Washington and Jerusalem, one that shadowed American presidents and Israeli prime ministers since Ronald Reagan was in the White House. The Americans called him a traitor. The Israelis deemed him a soldier, to some a hero. At times, both made him a diplomatic bargaining chip.The only American ever sentenced to life in prison for spying for an ally, Mr. Pollard was freed on parole to an uncertain future. After ducking cameras outside the prison in North Carolina, he was spotted hours later in New York, where his lawyers went to federal court to challenge the terms of his parole, including an ankle bracelet to monitor his movements.Grayer and thicker around the middle, Mr. Pollard, 61, would hardly be recognizable to most Americans anymore. Wearing khaki pants, a button-down blue shirt, dark glasses and a skullcap, he walked into the federal probation office with his wife, Esther, holding his arm, as if not to let him out of her presence again. His lawyers said he would be working as an analyst at an investment firm.“After three long and difficult decades, Jonathan has been reunited with his family,” Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu of Israel said in a statement from Jerusalem. Noting that he had “raised Jonathan’s case for years” with American leaders, Mr. Netanyahu added, “May this Sabbath bring him much joy and peace that will continue in the years and decades ahead.”There was no celebration by the American government. “This was one of the 10 most serious espionage cases in history,” said Joseph E. diGenova, the former United States attorney who prosecuted Mr. Pollard. “I’m delighted he served 30 years. I wish he would have served more.”The outspoken Mr. Pollard chose restraint on his first day out of prison. “I have no comment, sorry,” he told reporters outside the New York probation office. “I can’t say anything right now.”Mr. Pollard remained under parole conditions that he and his supporters consider to be onerous. Under federal rules, he cannot leave the country for at least five years without permission, and the White House repeated on Friday that it would not intervene to let him move to Israel, as he has requested.Besides insisting that he wear an electronic bracelet on his ankle, federal authorities stipulated that any computer he uses, including those of an employer, be subject to inspection. His lawyers want a federal judge to overturn both conditions.“The notion that, having fought for and finally obtained his release after serving 30 years in prison, Mr. Pollard will now disclose stale 30-year-old information to anyone is preposterous,” his lawyers, Eliot Lauer and Jacques Semmelman, said in a statement.Mr. Pollard grew up in a Jewish family and began dreaming about emigrating to Israel at age 12, according to a declassified damage assessment by the Central Intelligence Agency. As a student at Stanford University, it said, he fantasized about being a Mossad agent.Rejected from a C.I.A. fellowship, he went to work for the Navy as a civilian intelligence analyst in 1979, earning a reputation as “a capable — if eccentric — scholar and intelligence analyst” with “significant emotional instability,” according to the damage report.In June 1984, he began passing suitcases of classified documents to Israeli handlers, including information on Arab and Soviet weaponry as well as satellite photographs. A manual he gave handlers provided a guide to American signals intelligence, media reports said. He was paid tens of thousands of dollars and given jewels and foreign trips.He and his first wife, Anne, were arrested in November 1985 after being turned away from the Israeli Embassy, where they had sought asylum. Mr. Pollard agreed to plead guilty to a single charge of conspiring to commit espionage, but he gave remorseless prison interviews that were deemed a violation of the plea agreement and a judge sentenced him to life in prison.Anne Pollard was sentenced to five years for helping him. After she was released, the two divorced, and he later remarried. For years, the Israelis disavowed Mr. Pollard, but eventually granted him citizenship, acknowledged his work for them and renounced spying on the United States.His supporters call his punishment disproportionate, harsher than that for violent criminals or spies for hostile powers. “The United States spies on a lot of its allies. A lot of our allies spy on us. It’s the way of the world,” said Malcolm Hoenlein, chief executive of the Conference of Presidents of Major American Jewish Organizations.Others said he deserved to be punished, but believe the fervor in the American intelligence community was exacerbated by bias. Reuel Marc Gerecht, a former C.I.A. officer, said he would have kept Mr. Pollard behind bars for life. But he added: “With some folks, the emotional intensity of the Pollard issue unquestionably springs from a fairly serious anti-Israeli sentiment. Some of those are anchored in anti-Semitism.”Mr. Pollard’s critics denied that, and many Jewish Americans were among those who denounced him, worrying about questions of dual loyalty. “He wasn’t an Israeli,” Mr. diGenova said. “He was an American citizen who betrayed his country for money.”In Israel, Mr. Pollard became a cause célèbre. Posters with his face were plastered on walls in Jerusalem, and his case became a regular talking point when Israeli leaders visited the White House.In 1998, President Bill Clinton considered releasing him to seal an Israeli-Palestinian, peace agreement, only to back off after George J. Tenet, the C.I.A. director, threatened to resign. President Obama’s secretary of state, John Kerry, last year proposed more or less the same thing, but it went nowhere.In the end, Mr. Obama made no move to release Mr. Pollard early, but did not object when the United States Parole Commission decided to let him out after 30 years.Mr. Pollard left the prison in Butner, N.C., before dawn on Friday without being spotted by journalists waiting across a highway. An Israeli couple touring the United States in a recreational vehicle pulled up at 6:30 a.m., hoping to see his release.“He did something wrong,” said Laya Saul, who came with her husband, Yaron Jackson. “He deserved to do some time. But people who have done some really dark crimes have gotten less time than he did.”In Israel, Mr. Netanyahu sought to avoid celebrations that would provoke the Americans, but some could not resist. “A free man!” Ayelet Shaked, the hawkish justice minister, exulted on her Facebook page over Mr. Pollard’s photograph.Nachman Shai, a lawmaker from the center-left Zionist Union who heads a Parliament caucus that pushed for Mr. Pollard’s release, vowed to keep pressing his case. “We will not rest,” he wrote in a letter to Mr. Pollard, “until you are free to depart the United States for any destination of your choosing, first and foremost Israel.”


MONROVIA, Liberia —  Three members of a family in Liberia have contracted Ebola, two months after the country was declared free of the virus for the second time, health officials said on Friday.The most recent outbreak, which officials are calling the fourth wave, was confirmed after a 15-year-old boy with symptoms of Ebola — including fever, weakness and bleeding — was admitted to John F. Kennedy Medical Center in Monrovia, the capital, on Tuesday, the Liberian health minister, Dr. Bernice Dahn, said at a news conference. The boy was then placed in isolation in the hospital.Another senior health official, speaking on the condition of anonymity because he was not authorized to speak on the record, said the teenager was taken to the main Ebola treatment unit on Wednesday. He had started showing symptoms of Ebola last week, the official said.The teenager’s test came back positive on Thursday, as did tests on Friday for his father and a brother, the official said, adding that at least seven health care workers may have treated the teenager without the protective equipment essential for Ebola cases. A key member of the contact-tracing effort said one nurse wore only regular gloves when treating the teenager, who was bleeding at the time.Along with the father and the 8-year-old brother who tested positive, the boy’s mother and two other brothers — a 2-month-old and a 5-year-old — were taken to the Ebola treatment center and were being tested. On Friday, two other people suspected of having Ebola were admitted to the center; neither is related to the family, said two health care workers involved with the cases.In Paynesville, just outside Monrovia, health care workers in hazmat suits could be seen spraying the family’s house with disinfectant on Friday, and contact tracers were interviewing neighbors.“I feel bad, that is my community members,” said one, Helena Bokai, who sat on her stoop. “Ebola is not for one person. It can travel all over. If they die we will feel bad. All of us are here and are living together.”Health workers were also seen at the boy’s school, Living in Christ International Ministry School, spraying surfaces, setting up hand wash stations and distributing informational leaflets to students.There were conflicting reports as to whether the boy had attended school after he became contagious. The vice principal of the school, G. Othello Mannieh, said the boy had not been in school for three weeks, and the school registrar said he had heard the same from other teachers.But the senior health official said the boy had gone to school on Monday and Tuesday of this week, and an official involved with the investigation said the boy’s father had told health workers that the boy came home sick from school on Nov. 13, was treated at home by his parents over the weekend and went back to school on Monday.The official involved in the investigation suggested that school officials were denying the boy’s attendance to avoid looking irresponsible.The World Health Organization declared Liberia free of Ebola on May 9, but a resurgence of the disease the next month sickened four people, two of whom died. The country was declared Ebola-free again on Sept. 3.In Geneva, Dr. Bruce Aylward, the World Health Organization’s special representative for the Ebola response and deputy director general for outbreaks and health emergencies, told officials that the new cases had not dimmed hopes that West African countries were still moving toward eliminating the original outbreak. The W.H.O. declared Sierra Leone free of Ebola transmissions two weeks ago and Guinea released its last known patient from a treatment unit on Monday.The teenager’s case appears to point to the persistence of the virus among survivors, which can result in occasional resurgence of the disease, said Dr. Aylward, adding that flare-ups are expected to be less common and to end in 2016.Dr. Aylward said the boy had no known contacts with a survivor or a history of travel that might have put him at risk.He said the latest developments were the seventh time the W.H.O. suspected that a flare-up was related to the persistence of the virus in the population of survivors. For example, scientists have shown that the virus remains present for months in the semen of some men who recover from the disease, and could, in rare cases, be transmitted through unprotected sex.In all cases, however, transmission has been stopped quickly, with a low number of subsequent cases. New tools include an experimental vaccine that can be given to those who come into contact with patients.Dr. Thomas R. Frieden, director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in Atlanta, said the center was working closely with the Liberian government.“The new cases in Liberia show both the continuing threat of sporadic cases, and the readiness of the country, which rapidly diagnosed and isolated them,” Dr. Frieden said in an email. “C.D.C. will continue to assist on the front lines. Liberia is now highly experienced at stopping Ebola clusters, and with vigilance, they will do it again.”A slow initial global response to the outbreak has been blamed for the scale and length of the epidemic, which killed more than 11,000 in Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone.


A woman’s Facebook account was disabled. A bookstore was vandalized. And one company, moved by the attacks on Paris, just doesn’t want the association anymore.While the name Isis has become synonymous with a terrorist organization, the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria, it is also the name of a well-known Egyptian goddess.Many women are named Isis, including 396 babies born in the United States last year.For the world’s many Isises, each act of horror carried out by the Islamic State has been accompanied by the unsettling and repeated use of their name in news reports. An online petitioner has even gathered almost 57,000 supporters to call on the news media to stop using the acronym.“I named my daughter Isis because it’s strong and meaningful,” wrote one commenter on the petition, Shani Allman of Florida. “To have it degraded and have her jeopardized by the media’s insensitivity is completely disturbing.”A woman in Britain wrote that her 7-year-old daughter, who was named after the goddess, went to bed crying “because people were being horrible to her about her name.”Companies called Isis have been forced to confront how attached they are to the name. Isis was once the name of a mobile payment technology and a new condo building in Florida. They both changed their names last year. Isis Pharmaceuticals, a California biotech company founded in 1989, told CNN it is now discussing the same move.Part of the River Thames in Britain remains known by the name, as does a feminist club at Fordham University and the Labrador in “Downton Abbey.” The dog has been killed off from the show — though not because of its name. The cartoon “Archer” also had to adjust the name of its spy agency. (Fans of comics and 1970s television may recall Isis as the name of a superhero.)On Tuesday, Isis Books & Gifts, a Colorado store that was vandalized this week, pleaded in a Facebook post: “Please help us educate the media and your family and friends to call the terrorists by a more correct name — Daesh — not Islamic State, not ISIS, not ISIL.”The term Daesh — also sometimes referred to as Da’ish — has been used by officials in France since last year. It’s an acronynm of the group’s Arabic name, but it’s also favored by many people because it sounds like another Arabic word, daes, which is used as an insult.The White House most often uses ISIL to refer to the militants. It stands for Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant. Both ISIS and ISIL are often shortened to just the Islamic State, and all of those names anger many Muslims who disapprove of the word Islam being in the name, and because it implies the group is a state. (The Times typically uses “Islamic State” but does sometimes use the other names in quotations and headlines.)But it’s the ISIS acronym that seems to be causing the most problems for like-named people and organizations, with the Paris attacks now forcing them to face the issue anew.For Isis Pharmaceuticals, a name change was not in consideration as recently as last year. But a company spokesman told CBS News this week that the tragedy “weighed heavily on us, and we don’t want to have that association.”Isis Anchalee, a platform engineer based in San Francisco, suggested Tuesday on Twitter that Facebook had frozen her account because of her name.
            Facebook thinks I'm a terrorist. Apparently sending them a screenshot of my passport is not good enough for them to reopen my account.        The page was restored, with Facebook apologizing and explaining that the account had been flagged by one or more users as fake or offensive.Isis Beckwith, a 29-year-old college student and Navy veteran in Washington, says she’s gotten a lot of double-takes, chuckles and distasteful jokes, along with being asked whether she’s thought about changing her name. (She has not).“My father just thinks it’s a shame that the name has been tarnished with the association. I still think it’s beautiful,” wrote Ms. Beckwith, who was named after the Egyptian goddess, in an interview over Facebook Messenger.Ms. Beckwith says the good “definitely outweighs the bad” with the remarks she gets about her name. “I would just like others to think twice about what they are about to say,” she wrote. “It’s just starting to get old.”


WASHINGTON —  He was spirited out of a federal prison on Friday under cover of night, eluding witnesses in a cloak-and-dagger coda to a spy story that has strained relations between two allies for three decades.But while Jonathan J. Pollard, one of the most notorious spies of the late Cold War, tried to stay out of sight after emerging from custody almost as if from a time machine, the United States and Israel hoped his release would finally heal a long-festering open wound in their partnership.For 30 years, Mr. Pollard was at the center of a profound struggle between Washington and Jerusalem, one that shadowed American presidents and Israeli prime ministers since Ronald Reagan was in the White House. The Americans called him a traitor. The Israelis deemed him a soldier, to some a hero. At times, both made him a diplomatic bargaining chip.The only American ever sentenced to life in prison for spying for an ally, Mr. Pollard was freed on parole to an uncertain future. After ducking cameras outside the prison in North Carolina, he was spotted hours later in New York, where his lawyers went to federal court to challenge the terms of his parole, including an ankle bracelet to monitor his movements.Grayer and thicker around the middle, Mr. Pollard, 61, would hardly be recognizable to most Americans anymore. Wearing khaki pants, a button-down blue shirt, dark glasses and a skullcap, he walked into the federal probation office with his wife, Esther, holding his arm, as if not to let him out of her presence again. His lawyers said he would be working as an analyst at an investment firm.“After three long and difficult decades, Jonathan has been reunited with his family,” Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu of Israel said in a statement from Jerusalem. Noting that he had “raised Jonathan’s case for years” with American leaders, Mr. Netanyahu added, “May this Sabbath bring him much joy and peace that will continue in the years and decades ahead.”There was no celebration by the American government. “This was one of the 10 most serious espionage cases in history,” said Joseph E. diGenova, the former United States attorney who prosecuted Mr. Pollard. “I’m delighted he served 30 years. I wish he would have served more.”The outspoken Mr. Pollard chose restraint on his first day out of prison. “I have no comment, sorry,” he told reporters outside the New York probation office. “I can’t say anything right now.”Mr. Pollard remained under parole conditions that he and his supporters consider to be onerous. Under federal rules, he cannot leave the country for at least five years without permission, and the White House repeated on Friday that it would not intervene to let him move to Israel, as he has requested.Besides insisting that he wear an electronic bracelet on his ankle, federal authorities stipulated that any computer he uses, including those of an employer, be subject to inspection. His lawyers want a federal judge to overturn both conditions.“The notion that, having fought for and finally obtained his release after serving 30 years in prison, Mr. Pollard will now disclose stale 30-year-old information to anyone is preposterous,” his lawyers, Eliot Lauer and Jacques Semmelman, said in a statement.Mr. Pollard grew up in a Jewish family and began dreaming about emigrating to Israel at age 12, according to a declassified damage assessment by the Central Intelligence Agency. As a student at Stanford University, it said, he fantasized about being a Mossad agent.Rejected from a C.I.A. fellowship, he went to work for the Navy as a civilian intelligence analyst in 1979, earning a reputation as “a capable — if eccentric — scholar and intelligence analyst” with “significant emotional instability,” according to the damage report.In June 1984, he began passing suitcases of classified documents to Israeli handlers, including information on Arab and Soviet weaponry as well as satellite photographs. A manual he gave handlers provided a guide to American signals intelligence, media reports said. He was paid tens of thousands of dollars and given jewels and foreign trips.He and his first wife, Anne, were arrested in November 1985 after being turned away from the Israeli Embassy, where they had sought asylum. Mr. Pollard agreed to plead guilty to a single charge of conspiring to commit espionage, but he gave remorseless prison interviews that were deemed a violation of the plea agreement and a judge sentenced him to life in prison.Anne Pollard was sentenced to five years for helping him. After she was released, the two divorced, and he later remarried. For years, the Israelis disavowed Mr. Pollard, but eventually granted him citizenship, acknowledged his work for them and renounced spying on the United States.His supporters call his punishment disproportionate, harsher than that for violent criminals or spies for hostile powers. “The United States spies on a lot of its allies. A lot of our allies spy on us. It’s the way of the world,” said Malcolm Hoenlein, chief executive of the Conference of Presidents of Major American Jewish Organizations.Others said he deserved to be punished, but believe the fervor in the American intelligence community was exacerbated by bias. Reuel Marc Gerecht, a former C.I.A. officer, said he would have kept Mr. Pollard behind bars for life. But he added: “With some folks, the emotional intensity of the Pollard issue unquestionably springs from a fairly serious anti-Israeli sentiment. Some of those are anchored in anti-Semitism.”Mr. Pollard’s critics denied that, and many Jewish Americans were among those who denounced him, worrying about questions of dual loyalty. “He wasn’t an Israeli,” Mr. diGenova said. “He was an American citizen who betrayed his country for money.”In Israel, Mr. Pollard became a cause célèbre. Posters with his face were plastered on walls in Jerusalem, and his case became a regular talking point when Israeli leaders visited the White House.In 1998, President Bill Clinton considered releasing him to seal an Israeli-Palestinian, peace agreement, only to back off after George J. Tenet, the C.I.A. director, threatened to resign. President Obama’s secretary of state, John Kerry, last year proposed more or less the same thing, but it went nowhere.In the end, Mr. Obama made no move to release Mr. Pollard early, but did not object when the United States Parole Commission decided to let him out after 30 years.Mr. Pollard left the prison in Butner, N.C., before dawn on Friday without being spotted by journalists waiting across a highway. An Israeli couple touring the United States in a recreational vehicle pulled up at 6:30 a.m., hoping to see his release.“He did something wrong,” said Laya Saul, who came with her husband, Yaron Jackson. “He deserved to do some time. But people who have done some really dark crimes have gotten less time than he did.”In Israel, Mr. Netanyahu sought to avoid celebrations that would provoke the Americans, but some could not resist. “A free man!” Ayelet Shaked, the hawkish justice minister, exulted on her Facebook page over Mr. Pollard’s photograph.Nachman Shai, a lawmaker from the center-left Zionist Union who heads a Parliament caucus that pushed for Mr. Pollard’s release, vowed to keep pressing his case. “We will not rest,” he wrote in a letter to Mr. Pollard, “until you are free to depart the United States for any destination of your choosing, first and foremost Israel.”


